Master's Thesis: Response of free-living chemotactic bacteria to a variable substrate field in Lake Zurich
Abstract 
Nutrients are heterogeneously distributed throughout the water column and they frequently emerge as microscale hotspots and gradients. Various processes contribute to the production of gradients in the lake and they can lead to behavioural and metabolic responses of the bacteria. Thus, two strategies have been evolved: Non-motile bacteria, which optimize nutrient uptake by diffusion and motile bacteria, which exploit these microscale gradients. Along with the ability to move, microbes have evolved a vast range of taxes. Chemotaxis is one of the most studied microbial taxes and it is defined as the directed movement towards a chemoattractant as well as the directed movement away from a chemorepellent. There have been many applications of chemotaxis assays to measure this behaviour in the past few years but there is still not a fully developed assay for freshwater systems. With the microfluidic-based in situ chemotaxis assay (ISCA) we tried to measure chemotaxis in Lake Zurich by using different substrates as chemoattractants. We could demonstrate that the ISCA was not applicable to Lake Zurich due to different reasons such as causing turbulence during deployment, which led to variability in the data, dilution of the motile, chemotactic fraction of bacterial cells present in the lake as well as some technical issues. An extensive knowledge of motility patterns of bacteria present in Lake Zurich is necessary to shed more light into this subject. Microautoradiography and fluorescence in situ hybridization were conducted to investigate what taxa of free-living bacteria respond to a variable substrate field in Lake Zurich. Radiolabelled glutamine was used as tracer to assess microbial incorporation after two time points. We could demonstrate that the LD12 lineage of the Alphaproteobacteria, the acI cluster of the Actinobacteria and the Betaproteobacteria in general were quite abundant during August 2017 and revealed a moderate uptake activity for radiolabelled glutamine. Total uptake activity never reached 100 % due to oligotrophic adaptations of certain taxa, rapid tracer recycling and bacterial population demography. More probes have to be tested in the future to investigate other bacterial groups active in glutamine uptake. Future experiments need to be conducted to reproduce these results, link them to their genetic background of chemotaxis and place it into a broader context of variability of the substrate field in Lake Zurich. 
